How to create new users?
How to configure users?
How to create new roles?
How to assign users to roles?
How to control user access on projects?

How to create (and manage) new users?
1. Create new users
	
		Manage Jenkins-> Manage Users
		Give Username, Password, and Full Name. Enter those details and click Create User button.
		
		
		
		Create Users
		Modify - what can you modify?
		Delete Users
		
		This is coming from Jenkins own user database.
		
		Login with those users
		What option do you get?
		
		A normal user by default get all the privileges of an Admin user.
		
		
2. How to configure users?
	Login as a user
	On the right top corner, there is the Username. Besides that, there is a dropdown. 
	Go to the “Configure” option. Now here you will come to the configure window of Jenkins for the particular User. Here you can,
		Change the Username
		Add any Description
		Get the API token for the specific User
		Change your Password
		Can set any public-key authentication


3. How to create new roles?
	In general, we can define roles to every user. 
	Admin User has all the roles such as 
		defining roles, 
		create Users, 
		configure the system, 
		give access to the projects, 
		etc. 

	Following is indicative.
	-----------------------
	Manager may only view the projects. 
	Developers may need to make changes to the specific project and 
	Testers may need to access only to the Testing projects. 
	So how can we manage that?
	1. One of the plugin to use is called 
		"Role-based Authorization Strategy"
		To get this plugin there are 2 ways,
			Manually download plugin
			Download and install via Jenkins
		
	To download and install manually use this link to download the plugin.
		Google the plugin link - download it 
			In windows 
				add it to C:\Program Files (x86)\Jenkins\plugins folder. 
			In Linux
				Copy .hpi file into the JENKINS_HOME/plugins directory on Jenkins controller 
				(for e.g, on Debian default JENKINS_HOME is /var/lib/jenkins)
		Restart the Jenkins server.

	Alternatively
		Manage Jenkins -> Maganage Plugins
		
		Go to available section 
		search Roles Strategy plugin (Role-based Authorization Strategy)
		Download now and install after RESTART. 
		N.B: If a plugin is already installed 
			you will not find it in Available section.
			Instead you can find it in Installed section. 
			
	2. Manage Jenkins -> Configure Global Security 
	
		In the Authorization section, you will now find a Role-based Strategy 
		(This option only comes after that the plugin is installed and Jenkins is restarted). 
		Select that. 
		Click Apply and Save.
	
		Login as a User1 and see what happens.
		Now, User1 cannot access to the Jenkins because we are now using Role-based Strategy. 
		We need to define a role to this User.

4. How to assign users to roles?
		log in as an Admin and define Roles and assign them to Users.
		Now go to,
		Manage Jenkins -> Manage and Assign Roles -> Manage Roles 

		Here you can see 2 roles to define.
			Global Roles — 
				Here you define global roles.
				Provide authorization and access to the Global Level. 
				I can add Role such as 
					"admin": all access
					“employee” : no access
					"manager" : view all access.
				and control access.
				
			
			Item Roles — 
				Provide roles specific to a project. 
				Let's add a role called developer and add a pattern like Dev.* in this section. 
					a person with developer role 
						will be able to access projects with name starting like Dev. 
				Now he is not able to view or make changes to any other projects. 
				Let's also add a qa Role and with pattern like Test.* . 
				
		Go to,
		Manage Jenkins -> Manage and Assign Roles -> Assign Roles
		Like the Manage Roles section, there are 2 sections.
		
			Global Roles — 
				Please add User1 and User2 to the Global Roles. 
					And select the employee role to both users.

5. How to control user access on projects?
			Item Roles — 
				Please add User3 and User4 to the Item Roles and assign User3 as a Developer and User4 as a Tester.	

		Logout. Login as respective users and verify what you see.
		
		


